Geo::BUFR
=========

Library for handling of WMO (World Meteorological Organization) BUFR
files.

INSTALLATION

Installation is most easily done by modern tools like cpan and cpanm,
e.g.

   cpanm Geo::BUFR

If you prefer the old way: download the tar file from CPAN (Download
link at https://metacpan.org/pod/Geo::BUFR), unpack it and install
with

   perl Makefile.PL
   make
   make test
   make install

This will install the module in the standard location for which you
normally will need root privileges. To install in a non-standard
directory like /home/cpan, specify the directory during the 'perl
Makefile.PL' stage:

   perl Makefile.PL INSTALL_BASE=/home/cpan

after which you are adviced to modify the environment variable
$PERL5LIB in order for Perl to find the module when executing
programs, e.g.

   export PERL5LIB=/home/cpan/lib/perl/5.8.4:$PERL5LIB

(or the corresponding command for your operating system and Perl version).

You will need a C compiler which supports variable length arrays. This
is standard on Unix-like systems. On Windows I recommend using
Strawberry Perl, in which case you should type 'gmake' instead of
'make' when installing.

DEPENDENCIES

This module requires these other modules, all of which are expected to
be part of a standard Perl distribution:

Carp, Config, Cwd, DynaLoader, FileHandle, File::Spec::Functions,
Getopt::Long, Pod::Usage, Scalar::Util, Storable, Test::More,
Time::Local

DESCRIPTION

BUFR = Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological
data. BUFR is becoming the standard exchange format for meteorological
observations. This module provides methods for decoding and encoding
BUFR messages, and for displaying information in BUFR B and D tables
and in BUFR flag and code tables. The core routines for encoding and
decoding bitstreams are implemented in C.

This module also installs some example programs: bufrread.pl,
bufrresolve.pl, bufrextract.pl, bufrencode.pl, bufr_reencode.pl and
bufralter.pl. See https://wiki.met.no/bufr.pm/start for examples of
use.


COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

Copyright (C) 2010-2025 MET Norway

